---
layout: post
title: Student, It Isolates Variables
published: true
---

I've been working my way through [Paradigms of Artificial
Intelligence Programming (PAIP)](book). I just finished reading up on an AI program
named Student. It is a clever little bit of code that can solve word problems
that wouldn't be out of place in a high-school algebra class.

The root of most equations in which you are solving for one variable is
isolating that one variable. You just keep moving things around using simple
rules until the unknown is the only thing on one side of the equals sign. At
that point things are solved. So once you type out exactly how to invert each
of the mathematical operations that Student is likely to encounter, solving the
equations becomes [trivial](http://books.google.com/books?id=7papZR4oVssC&pg=PA84&lpg=PA84&dq=trivial+feynman&source=bl&ots=esUV9cqQ_W&sig=HAJwHxBqT6vVxG9eH7O4YE7IzuM&hl=en&sa=X&ei=wCqsUeLCIOSL0QGn0oHQDg&ved=0CDwQ6AEwAg#v=onepage&q=trivial%20feynman&f=false).

However, we don't give Student equations. We give it paragraphs. It is solving word 
problems.

A modern reader might suppose this means that advanced AI is being used to understand 
language and then on the basis of that understanding the text is parsed into equations. 
Actually, it is far simpler than that. The parsing of word problems into equations in 
Student is the same technique I've talked about before in [Eliza](eliza). They both use 
extremely basic pattern matching.

There are a few differences between the two programs. For example, the pattern
matching code of Eliza is ready to quit after finding its first match, but
Student recursively matches every part of its input. If you give it a paragraph
it will keep on breaking the input up until it has a series of equations which
model the problem that was given.

Like Eliza, the short fall of the program is that if you give it a
bit of math that doesn't fit into the patterns that were supplied for it, it
won't behave properly. 

[book]: https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1558601910/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=joshuacoles-20&camp=1789&creative=9325&linkCode=as2&creativeASIN=1558601910&linkId=d42b5a7ed5037f5566cabdb8ca59f9cb
[eliza]: http://joshuacol.es/2012/06/21/eliza-is-only-a-chat-bot.html