---
layout: post
title: Chat Bots
published: true
---

I remember when I was young my mom had me in her lap and I was reading a book at her request.
It wasn't the first time we had done this, but this time went different to many of the other times.
My mom did something that humans do commonly - she erred.
Often people act like this sort of thing is bad.
It isn't.
Her error was to our benefit.
Accidentally, she turned multiple pages, rather than the one page she had intended to turn.

This mistake changed the course of my life dramatically.
To her astonishment I read the page she skipped not the page she was on.
Or rather - I didn't read the page.
I had memorized the book and was repeating it from my memory.

What followed was a dedicated effort on her part to teach me phonetics with hooked on phonics.
Over the course of what I remember as a winter break I went from a reading level appropriate to me - I was in early grade school - to one much higher.
The school wished to move me forward three grades in response to my enormous jump in proficiency.
My mother declined for the sake of my social development.

I now recognize what happened to me as overfitting a small training dataset.
I read in text, memorized it, spat back out that same text.
So the time spent learning to read was time spent learning to generalize from the small datasets I was reading to the majority of English writing.

## Talking Programs

My first ever contribution to an open source project that wasn't my
own was a plugin for an IRC chat bot in `#clojure` on freenode. The plugin was
called findfn, because that is what it did. When someone types something in
IRC along the lines of `findfn 2 2 4` it would return a list of all
the functions which would return `4` after being passed `2` twice. 
In that example it would probably return the operators
for both addition and multiplication. Other times it might return `first`, `last`,
`map`, or any number of other functions.

To do this the plugin took a brute force approach. There weren't any
clever means of figuring out what would return what, though it would be
probably be possible to do that given functions with the right metadata.
Instead it went through all the functions in the core namespaces and
tested each of them to see if applying all but the last argument would return
a result which matched the last argument.

It wasn't long after that I submitted the plugin that I saw it being
rolled out in `#clojure`. Then only a little while after that I saw the plugin
being merged into the core of the bot. For a first time contribution to open
source I was pretty happy with the result. People actually found something I
had helped to build to be useful.

I'm really glad that I had the chance to give back to the IRC
community in `#clojure`. For those of you who program in Clojure, but
haven't been there, you're really missing out. It is home to some
of the nicest and most helpful people I've met online. I'm pretty
sure that I ended up having more questions answered in the IRC chat and through
searching its logs then I did on [StackOverflow][3].

I know that I would never have submitted the plugin if it weren't for
wonderful people like amalloy and raynes. amalloy helped me fix a bug in the
initial implementation of the function and also guided me through submitting the
plugin to lazybot.

This early chat bot didn't think. It did, however, help people.
It thought for them.
It had utility. 

It wasn't the only chat bot I wrote.

When my uncle came out from South Carolina to visit us for Christmas.
He brought along a laptop which had a license on it which allowed him to run
chat bots on Camfrog, Camfrog is a video conferencing platform geared
around chat rooms. He wanted me to create a bot for the program and I was
happy to do so.

At first we tried to find a way to copy the dll of an existing bot, because
it already did something really close to what we needed. This didn't
work, as the bots architecture didn't allow it to have two
separate questions files. So I was forced to put on the programming belt and
hammer out some code.

I wrote an event based C++ dll which integrated against the closed source C++ bot
that loads and sends events to the dll. At the time this was one of the most 
complicated programs I'd ever written, but it was actually a pretty trivial program.
Given datasets about questions and answer pairs it let people race to answer the 
questions.

Players loved it.
It taught them language.
It helped them to think more quickly, because it was a race.

When I finished the bot, the week was over and my uncle left for home. When I
woke up in the morning my uncles laptop was gone and a question had been
left in its place. How would my untested code fare in the wild? Thinking about
it helps me to understand why it is that developers love web apps so much. It
will be such a pain to push out updates if this bot doesn't work. 

Another program that outputs text. Another program that generates utility. Yet 
there is nothing there like what a human does. There is no generalization from 
the examples to the underlying meaning.

## Smarter programs

I've been reading and enjoying [Paradigms of Artificial Intelligence: Case Studies in Common Lisp](book).
It is an amazing book written by <a href="http://norvig.com/index.html">Peter Norvig</a>, formerly of
NASA and now head of research at Google. Norvig has a way of talking about AI programs that
shaped the field in their time in a way that educates rather than confuses.

The programs he talks about start out seeming like magic, but because he is 
good at giving explanations the magic tricks quickly fade, replaced by explanation.
They seem baffling and astounding. Then you find out what is
<a href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2H81A3bU68k">really going on</a> and
it might still be cool, but its a different kind of cool. Once you know
the trick behind it, the entire program is seen in a new light.

This feeling, the opposite of magic, is actually at the root of what it even means to 
communicate explanations well. Magic hides the explanation for events. Norvig doesn't.

To show you what I mean I'm going to go over an AI that Norvig talks
about in the book called Eliza. Eliza is a chat bot built way back when and it
tricked a lot of people into thinking there was actually something intelligent
behind it. That people took it seriously actually freaked out the person who
coded the AI.

So what is Eliza? Eliza is a rule based translator. What does that mean?
Well I'll give you an example of a set of rules to show you. These rules
are taken directly from an implementation of a subset of the features of the
actual Eliza that I wrote in Clojure, one of my favorite programming languages.
I'm hoping it will be pretty readable even if you aren't
familiar with the language:


<div>
<code>
<pre>
("?*x I want ?*y"
  ("What would it mean if you got ?*y"
   "Suppose you got ?*y soon?"
   "Why do you want ?*y"))
</pre>
</code>
</div>

So what we have above is a list of two items. The first item is a string and
the second item is a list. That first string, it is a pattern. Whenever Eliza
is told something it will check this rule and look at the pattern. It will then
try to see if there is any point in what it was told where &lsquo;I want&rsquo;
appears. If there is it will save segments of text which will be called
`?*x` and `?*y` for use. The second item in the list is
another list. This list contains strings, each of which is a response. If Eliza
managed to save anything to `?*x` and`?*y` it will
select one of these response strings at random. Then using the saved variables
it will create a new string. There is also this stage where Eliza converts
things like you to me and me to you in the values it saves. So given this rule
if I were to tell Eliza, &ldquo;Hey you, I want to make you look simple.&rdquo;
It might respond, &ldquo;What would it mean if you got to make me look
simple.&rdquo;

Eliza has a lot of rules and most of them are kind of vague. It allows you to
become convinced that it knows more than it really does by being vague. It
parrots things back, but leaves things open ended. Sometimes it is going to
mess up and give really weird responses, but with enough patterns it can lead
you into fooling yourself for a while.

Fun fact: at one point Eliza almost got a job. Prestigious medical journals
were actually wondering if using Eliza to fill in for actual psychiatry might
be a good idea. They wouldn’t have to pay it much after all. Remember when I
said the author was a little bothered by how seriously people were taking the
program? I wonder what sort of things might have brought that on.

Despite all of this, it was actually pretty cool to implement. Usually I
would use regular expressions to match a pattern in a string, but this time I
got to see how matching patterns can be done at a lower level. Now if
you&rsquo;re interested in all of that you can check out some of the code in
a <a href="https://gist.github.com/2970757">github gist</a>. Be
warned&hellip;. I&rsquo;m using mutually recursive functions and there are a
whole lot of parentheses.


[book]: https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1558601910/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=joshuacoles-20&camp=1789&creative=9325&linkCode=as2&creativeASIN=1558601910&linkId=d42b5a7ed5037f5566cabdb8ca59f9cb

Eliza isn't the only program in that book, but they tend to be the one people know about.
Student is another program I learned about through PAIP. It is a clever little bit of code that can solve word problems
that wouldn't be out of place in a high-school algebra class.

The root of most equations in which you are solving for one variable is
isolating that one variable. You just keep moving things around using simple
rules until the unknown is the only thing on one side of the equals sign. At
that point things are solved. So once you type out exactly how to invert each
of the mathematical operations that Student is likely to encounter, solving the
equations becomes [trivial](http://books.google.com/books?id=7papZR4oVssC&pg=PA84&lpg=PA84&dq=trivial+feynman&source=bl&ots=esUV9cqQ_W&sig=HAJwHxBqT6vVxG9eH7O4YE7IzuM&hl=en&sa=X&ei=wCqsUeLCIOSL0QGn0oHQDg&ved=0CDwQ6AEwAg#v=onepage&q=trivial%20feynman&f=false).

However, we don't give Student equations. We give it paragraphs. It is solving word 
problems.

A modern reader might suppose this means that advanced AI is being used to understand 
language and then on the basis of that understanding the text is parsed into equations. 
Actually, it is far simpler than that. The parsing of word problems into equations in 
Student is the same technique I've talked about before in [Eliza](eliza). They both use 
extremely basic pattern matching.

There are a few differences between the two programs. For example, the pattern
matching code of Eliza is ready to quit after finding its first match, but
Student recursively matches every part of its input. If you give it a paragraph
it will keep on breaking the input up until it has a series of equations which
model the problem that was given.

Like Eliza, the shortfall of the program is that if you give it a
bit of math that doesn't fit into the patterns that were supplied for it, it
won't behave properly. 

Yet again, no generalization.

[3]: http://www.stackoverflow.com/

## NLU

Now I'm working at Amazon on Alexa.
The world has transformer architectures that actually are trying to generalize such that they understand language.


[book]: https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1558601910/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=joshuacoles-20&camp=1789&creative=9325&linkCode=as2&creativeASIN=1558601910&linkId=d42b5a7ed5037f5566cabdb8ca59f9cb
[eliza]: http://joshuacol.es/2012/06/21/eliza-is-only-a-chat-bot.html